Hello, everyone.
In this lesson, we're going to learn how to let users log out.
So in our previous lesson, we learned more about sessions and we allowed users to see this template
when they logged in.
Also now in the top right corner, instead of seeing a log in form, they see this menu.
Now, our goal in this lesson is to make this sign out button come to life.
Right?
We want to give users the ability to sign out or destroy their current session.
So our first step towards making this happen would be to dig in to the HTML template for this and make
sure we are aware of where this form is going to submit once a user clicks on this sign out button.
Let me show you what I mean.
So right now, let's jump into our text editor within our Views folder.
Let's jump into the file named Home Dash Dashboard online number 23.
We see that sign out button and it lives within a form.
Now, currently, the action for this form is set to a placeholder hash tag.
Let's get rid of this placeholder and instead say slash log out.
Right.
That's the fuel that this form is going to submit to.
So let's go ahead and save this file.
And now let's jump in to our file that is named Rouda Dot J.S..
Right.
We would want to set up a new route to handle this slash logout.
You are so jump into Rueter dot J.S. right below these lines.
Let's add a new line and let's say Rueter dot post.
Right.
This is going to be a post request because a form is being submitted and for the euro, we're looking
out for it's slash logout.
And then for the second argument.
So comma, what function do we want to call in response to this?
Well, let's imagine that within our user controller, we are going to have a function named logout.
OK, let's go ahead and save this file.
And now let's jump in to our user controller and build out that log out function.
So within our controllers folder, let's jump into the file that is named user controller Dot Gorgias.
And in an earlier lesson, I already created this empty skeleton function named Log Out.
If you don't already have this, that's OK.
Just pause the video and set this up.
OK, but for this log out function within its parentheses, let's include two parameters, right?
RFQ and RSS.
Now, within the body of this function, all we need to do is say request dot session.
Right.
That's how we can access the session object and now it has a method.
So let's look inside it with the dot and call the method named destroy.
So if the current incoming request from a browser has a cookie with a valid or matching session ID,
this is going to find that in our database and destroy that session.
OK, then after this line, let's send back a response.
So let's just say a response dot send.
And just as a quick test, we can say you are now logged out.
All right, let's go ahead and save this and test it out.
So back in the browser, be sure to refresh.
So the sign out form has the updated action value.
OK, and now if I click sign out, we see you are now logged out.
And if I go into my Mongo DB Atlus account and within my sessions collection, if I click find to reload
in the latest data, you can see instead of there being two documents now there's only one session document
and this is the one where username is Cat, right.
That's my other Mozilla Firefox web browser.
The idea is the session document for the user was successfully deleted.
So as you might expect, with that session being gone back in my browser where I was logged in as Brad,
if I now visit the home page or base, you rl cool.
It successfully treats me as a guest.
I'm no longer logged in.
So the log out feature is working, but let's make an improvement.
So just as a quick test, let me log back in.
OK, and then if I visit the home page URL, we can see I am logged in and the improvement I want to
make is when a user logs out.
So if I click sign out again, instead of showing a user this awkward, you are now logged out screen
from the slash log out.
You are out.
Instead of this, it would make more sense to redirect them to the home.
You órale instead of this weird, awkward intermediate you URL and message.
Right.
So let's just redirect them to the home and they will see the guest home page.
Let me show you what I mean.
So back in our user controller file within our log out function, let's get rid of this line where we
say response dot send.
You are now logged out.
Instead of response send, we want to use response dot redirect, however, because this destroy method
is going to have to deal with our database.
It's not going to complete immediately.
And because we want to be sure that that task has completed before redirecting them to the home page.
What we need to do is worry about the timing or coordination of these events.
So let's do this within the parentheses for destroy.
Let's provide a callback function.
Now, if you just had a little voice in the back of your head, say, couldn't we use a promise instead
of a callback function, kudos to you.
However, as of the time of this recording, I do not believe the session package functions, return
promises.
Don't worry, we will make extensive use of promises a bit later on.
Anyways, within these destroyed parentheses, let's include a function, parentheses, curly brackets.
All right.
And once the destroy function has had a chance to actually complete the task of deleting that session
in the database, then we just want to say response dot redirect and let's just redirect them to slash
or the home page.
The reason we didn't need to wait for this to complete before is because we were just showing a simple
message that said you are now logged out, whereas now when we want to redirect them to the home page,
remember that the home page is going to be different depending on whether you have a user session or
not.
It's going to render a different template depending on that condition.
So in this case, we really do need to wait until the session has been destroyed.
All right.
With this setup, let's go ahead and save this and test it out.
So back in my browser, I would need to send a new request to the home page to log in again.
Be sure that you do that as well.
Do not just click the back button in your browser because your browser would be using a cached copy
of this you url.
So visually, your browser would make it look like you're logged in even though you're really not.
So be sure to go up to the address bar and send a fresh request to this.
You are.
Well, OK, let's log in.
So Brad, type in your password.
OK, we see.
Congrats.
Don't worry, we're also going to fix this awkward intermediate login screen as well.
But now if I go back to the home page, you rl I'm successfully logged in and now let's test out the
log out function.
So hopefully it's a lot smoother now I click sign out, there's no awkward intermediate screen.
It just redirects me to the home page.
But obviously that section is successfully destroyed.
Awesome.
Next, let's make a similar improvement for the logging in action, meaning let's get rid of that awkward
intermediate congrats screen that you would see after a successful login.
Instead, let's just redirect the user to the home page.
You are only now, since they would have a session, they would see the actual application instead.
So to set that up, let's jump back into our text editor and we're going to be working within our login
function.
So if the user login method is successful, if the promise resolves, then this then code will run.
So what we want to do is get rid of this awkward intermediate screen where we send back a little bit
of congrats text.
So let's delete that line.
And instead we just want to redirect to the home page.
However, again, we do need to worry about the timing of our events.
What I mean by this is when we say request session user, the session package is going to recognize
that we are changing the session data and in response is going to automatically update that session
data in the database for us.
This is great.
It's very helpful that it does this automatically, however, because updating data in a database is
an asynchronous action that's going to take a while to complete.
We don't just want to run response dot redirect right here because there's no guarantee that the database
will have actually been updated in time before the redirect runs.
So here's what we can do.
Even though the session package would usually automatically update or save the session data for us,
we can manually tell it to save.
So right here, let's say this request session dot save and save as a method.
So parentheses to call it OK.
And now within these parentheses we give it a callback function and it will not call that function until
it's actually had a chance to complete that action of saving the new data to the database.
So within these parentheses we just say function, parentheses, curly brackets and within the body
of this function.
This is where we can finally say response, redirect and just redirect them to slash or the base, you
are so cool.
Let's give this file to save and test it out.
So back in the browser, if I perform a successful log in.
Perfect, there's no awkward intermediate screen, I'm just redirected to the same you URL only now
the server recognizes my newly created session and I am logged in.
Cool.
So now at this point, both the actions of logging in and logging out feel a lot smoother.
However, this does raise one question.
Let me show you that question right now.
So if I log back out, the question I want to pose is what if I perform a failed logging attempt?
Right.
What if I don't provide a correct username and password?
Well, instead of this awkward intermediate screen of just invalid usernames password, I think it would
make more sense to instead redirect the user back to this same guest page.
Only maybe we could have a little red warning rectangle box here that says invalid username and password.
Try again.
A common name for this type of feature is flash messaging.
And that is exactly what we are going to learn how to set up in our next lesson.
So let's keep things rolling and I'll see you then.